Doc: Clarification of ACL filters (#11448)
apache/trafficserver: doc/admin-guide/files/remap.config.en.rst

can be explicitly stated with ``@src_ip=all``.

Named Filters

> -------------

Reviewer: Good fixes for these.

deactivated.) The filter `local_only` will only be applied to the
second mapping.

Special Filter and ip_allow Named Filter
----------------------------------------

If :file:`ip_allow.yaml` has a "deny all" filter, it is treated as a special filter that is applied before remapping for
optimizaion. To control this for specific remap rules, a named filter called `ip_allow` is pre-defined. This named filter is

> activated implicitly in default. To stop applying the special rule, disable the `ip_allow` filter as shown below.

Reviewer 2: Should that be "by default" ?

Author: Do you mean "deactivate" the ip_allow named filter by default? 

A tricky behavior is if this is deactivated, step 1 and 4 is disabled. Should we disable only step 1  by default?

> 1. Special "deny all" filter in :file:`ip_allow.yaml`
> 2. In-line Filter in :file:`remap.config`
> 3. Named Filter in :file:`remap.config`
> 4. Filters in :file:`ip_allow.yaml`

::

   # ip_allow.yaml
   ip_allow:
      - apply: in
        ip_addrs: 198.51.100.0/24
        action: deny
        method: ALL

   # remap.config
   .deactivatefilter ip_allow
   map ...
   map ...
   .activatefilter ip_allow

Note this entirely disables :file:`ip_allow.yaml` checks for those remap rules.

Evaluation Order and Matching Policy
------------------------------------

> ATS evaluates multiple ACL filters in below order.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ATS evaluates multiple ACL filters in the following order:
```

> 1. Special "deny all" filter in :file:`ip_allow.yaml`

Author: Add a note at the end of this subsection.

2. In-line Filter in :file:`remap.config`
3. Named Filter in :file:`remap.config`
4. Filters in :file:`ip_allow.yaml`

> When a ACL filter is found, ATS stop processing ACL filters depending on mathcing policy configured by

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When an ACL filter is found, ATS stops processing ACL filters depending on the matching policy configured by
```

:ts:cv:`proxy.config.url_remap.acl_matching_policy`.

First Explicit Match Wins Policy

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: I appreciate what you're trying to say here, but distinguishing the two behaviors as "explicit" and "implicit" is probably not helpful to the user. Nor do we want to say that the one is explicit, and the other is first match wins: if you think about it, both only apply to the first match. The real difference between these is what the match criteria is:

* In the new way added in 10, the ACL filters match based upon IP only, as they do for ip_allow.yaml.
* In the old way they match differently than ip_allow: they have to match both IP and method. 

I think this will be the most helpful framework for the user to understand and choose between the two policies. Thus I suggest something like this in these sections:

```
Match on IP and Method Policy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With this policy, ACL filters, named or inline, only take effect if both
IP and method match the incoming request. This policy is useful for
organizations that want ACL rules to additively allow or deny specific
methods in addition to other ACL filters and ip_allow.yaml rules.
Consider a filter like the following:

map http://www.example.com/ http://internal.example.com/ @action=deny @method=POST

The implicit @src_ip is all client IP addresses, so this filter will
match on any POST request matched by this remap rule from any client and
its action will be to deny such POST requests. For all other methods,
the filter will not take effect, thus allowing other active ACL filters
or an ip_allow.yaml rule to determine the action to take for any other
transaction.

...

Match on IP Policy 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With this policy, ACL filters match solely based upon IP, meaning that
ACL filters match like ip_allow.yaml rules. This policy is useful for
organizations that want to have ACL filters behave like ip_allow rules
specific to remap targets. Thus, consider a filter like the following:

map http://www.example.com/ http://internal.example.com/ @action=allow @method=GET @method=HEAD

The implicit @src_ip is all client IP address, so this filter will apply
to all transactions matching this remap rule. Again, like an analogously
crafted ip_allow allow rule, this will allow ``GET`` and ``HEAD`` requests
while denying all other methods to the ``internal.example.com`` origin.
No other ACL filters or ip_allow rules will apply for this target.

This policy is new to ATS 10.

```

Author: Beside the naming of the policies, descriptions are clear. I'd use the same example to clarify the differences.

Author: After I considered naming for a while, I start calling them "Match on IP and Method Policy" and "Match on IP only Policy".

> This is the default matching policy. ATS stops processing ACL filters only if an explicit match of IP address and HTTP method is

Reviewer 2: But it can be an explicit match without an IP right? Like I can match on method only? And that can still match right?

Author: Right. If there're no `@src_ip`, it's the same as `@src_ip=ALL` that matches with any IP.

Author: With Brians's comment, the new description clarifies the absence of `@src_ip` matches with any IP.

> This is the default matching policy. ATS stops processing ACL filters only if an explicit match of IP address and HTTP method is

Author: Sounds like we need to talk which config should be default. 

I'd prefer compatible with old ATS versions. New behavior as default seems too painful on upgrading to me.

> This is the default matching policy. ATS stops processing ACL filters only if an explicit match of IP address and HTTP method is

Reviewer: Adding the configuration shouldn't be too bad, right? There's already configuration change requirements involved with ATS 10. We changed the entire format of the file to YAML. :) I can't image setting this to the non-default value is unreasonable.

We need to rather decide which is the proper default for users and make that the default.

---

While writing this comment, the thought occurs to me that maybe we should take a slightly different approach to this. Maybe it makes sense for us to build on top of your configuration switch and make it work like this:

* **Legacy ACL matching.** This keeps ACL rule matching the way ATS 9 and prioror matches.
* **Enhanced ACL filters.** With this enabled, `@action=deny` and `@action=allow` function like ip_allow.yaml rules (i.e., the way my change makes them). But in addition to those actions, we can add `@action=add_deny` and `@action=add_allow`. These would allow users to add specific methods to deny or allow lists, like ATS 9 behaves currently behaves with `@action=deny` and `@action=allow`. This way enhanced offers a super set of functionality.

Going this route, we would make the "enhanced" feature the default because it is unambiguously superior. But since it is backwards incompatible, the legacy switch is added (non-default) to ease transition to ATS 10.

This will also make things easier for users to transition to the new behavior because remap.config would simply be changed with a few sed commands to transition `@action=deny` to `@action=add_deny` and `@action=allow` to `@action=add_allow`.

> This is the default matching policy. ATS stops processing ACL filters only if an explicit match of IP address and HTTP method is

Reviewer 4: I would suggest keeping the default behaviour the same as 9.x only because the human errors that could occur by changing the default are pretty high. Changing the default would make the assumption administrates will read the new docs thoroughly and update their configs to replicate the same behaviour. 

If we implicitly allow methods that are not specified, we are creating behaviour that is not visible to the administrators. They may not think like a software engineer and investigate in a way that any of us would which leaves big gaps of vulnerabilities that could open up. 

I think keeping the newer behaviour as an optional enhancement for the right people to try would make more sense. They would be updating their configs knowing the implications of the change rather than just trying to make it all run again.

> This is the default matching policy. ATS stops processing ACL filters only if an explicit match of IP address and HTTP method is

Reviewer: Thanks for the thoughts, @masaori335 and @jasmine-nahrain .

I would be content with:
1. Make it the default for ATS 10, but deprecate it.
2. Remove it for ATS 11

Does that sound fine?

found.

::

   # ip_allow.yaml
   ip_allow:
      - apply: in
        ip_addrs: 198.51.100.0/24
        action: deny
        method: PUT

   # remap.config
   .definefilter named-filter-1 @action=deny @method=HEAD

>    .definefilter named-filter-2 @actio==allow @method=POST

Author: Nice catch! Fixed.

   .activatefilter named-filter-1
   .activatefilter named-filter-2

   map http://www.example.com/ http://internal.example.com/ @action=deny @method=GET

The result of this example is below. The evaluation applied from left to right until explicit match is found.

====== ================ ================ ================ ================ =============
Method In-line Filter   Named Filter 1   Named Filter 2   ip_allow.yaml    result
====== ================ ================ ================ ================ =============
GET    deny  (explicit) \-               \-               \-               denied  (403)
HEAD   allow (implicit) deny  (explicit) \-               \-               denied  (403)
POST   allow (implicit) allow (implicit) allow (explicit) \-               allowed (200)
PUT    allow (implicit) allow (implicit) deny  (implicit) deny  (explicit) denied  (403)
DELETE allow (implicit) allow (implicit) deny  (implicit) allow (implicit) allowed (200)

> ====== ================ ================ ================ ================ =============

Reviewer: I really like these tables you made. This will be very helpful to users. I'm sorry if I come across as harping on the explicit/implicit terminology, but I don't prefer it here either, but for different reasons than the policy naming. For this "match on ip and method" policy we don't want to say, that the inline filter implicitly allows HEAD requests, for example. It does not in fact allow them, but rather leaves it to other filters or rules to decide. It's more accurate to say it doesn't apply to HEAD requests. How about this tweak?

```
====== ================ ================ ================ ================ =============
Method In-line Filter   Named Filter 1   Named Filter 2   ip_allow.yaml    result
====== ================ ================ ================ ================ =============
GET    deny             \-               \-               \-               denied  (403)
HEAD   N/A              deny             \-               \-               denied  (403)
POST   N/A              N/A              allow            \-               allowed (200)
PUT    N/A              N/A              N/A              deny             denied  (403)
DELETE N/A              N/A              N/A              allow            allowed (200)
====== ================ ================ ================ ================ =============
```

Author: PTAL

First Filter Wins Policy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ATS processes the first ACL filter only. This means following ACL filters are never processed.

====== ================ ================ ================ ================ =============
Method In-line Filter   Named Filter 1   Named Filter 2   ip_allow.yaml    result
====== ================ ================ ================ ================ =============
GET    deny  (explicit) \-               \-               \-               denied  (403)
HEAD   allow (implicit) deny  (explicit) \-               \-               allowed (200)
POST   allow (implicit) \-               allow (explicit) \-               allowed (200)
PUT    allow (implicit) \-               \-               deny  (explicit) allowed (200)
DELETE allow (implicit) \-               \-               \-               allowed (200)

> ====== ================ ================ ================ ================ =============

Reviewer: I suggest:

```

If the IP match policy is applied, then given the example remap rule
above, all requests to ``internal.example.com`` are filtered like an
ip_allow rule applies to them that denies GET requests and allows all
other methods:

====== ================ ================ ================ ================ =============
Method In-line Filter   Named Filter 1   Named Filter 2   ip_allow.yaml    result
====== ================ ================ ================ ================ =============
GET    deny             \-               \-               \-               denied  (403)
HEAD   allow            \-               \-               \-               allowed (200)
POST   allow            \-               \-               \-               allowed (200)
PUT    allow            \-               \-               \-               allowed (200)
DELETE allow            \-               \-               \-               allowed (200)
====== ================ ================ ================ ================ =============
```

Author: PTAL. I left specified actions in subsequent filters to high light they're ignored.
